---
layout: archive
title: "Research"
permalink: /research/
author_profile: true
---
## **Working Papers**

**Panic at the Courtroom: how banning the LGBTQ+ "panic" defense shapes the prevalence of hate crimes**  
*Draft available upon request*  
> **Abstract:** Can legislative interventions protect marginalized communities? I examine whether the prohibition of the LGBTQ+ "panic" defense, a legal strategy that seeks to blame the victim's sexual orientation or gender identity for the defendant's violent behavior, affects the prevalence of hate crimes. Drawing on the concepts of the deterrent and expressive functions of law, I argue that legislative measures against this practice decrease the number of hate crimes in two ways. First, by directly altering the material costs of engaging in the targeted behavior. Second, by the mediating power of social norm perceptions. To identify the causal effect of banning this practice, I leverage the gradual roll-out of LGBTQ+ "panic" defense bans across the US and implement a difference-in-differences design. The results show that the introduction of these bills leads to significantly lower levels of anti-LGBTQ+ hate crime rates. Besides contributing to the literature on minority politics, policy feedback and hate crime prevention, insights gained from this work are of assistance to policy makers and minority rights advocates.    
<p>&nbsp;</p>  

**Can wedge strategies by mainstream parties cross-cut the anti-immigration far right vote?**  
-- with [Lukas Stoetzer](http://lukas-stoetzer.org/), [Heike Klüver](http://www.heike-kluever.com/) and [Petra Schleiter](https://www.politics.ox.ac.uk/person/petra-schleiter) --  
*Draft available upon request*  
> **Abstract:** Anti-immigration campaigns have helped far right parties to establish themselves in party systems around the world. We examine whether mainstream parties can employ wedge issue campaigns that divide the far right anti-immigration vote to win back electoral support. Wedge issues that cross-cut the anti-immigration vote may enhance the electoral support of mainstream parties, as long as they do not simultaneously alienate pro-immigration voters. We evaluate this expectation using a panel survey experiment conducted during the 2021 German federal election. The first wave allows us to identify wedge issues that the mainstream CDU/CSU can stress to cross-cut the anti-immigration vote. The second wave raises the salience of these issues by manipulating the perceived issue agenda of the CDU/CSU using hypothetical campaign posters. We find that this wedge strategy is effective for subgroups of voters, although it does not increase vote intentions for the CDU/CSU overall.
<p>&nbsp;</p>  

**The German Hate Crime Dictionary (GHCD): Measuring Spatial and Temporal Trends in Hate Crime Incidents using Quantitative Text Analysis**  
*Draft available upon request*  
> **Abstract:** This paper proposes a new technique for measuring spatial and temporal trends in hate crime incidents based on quantitative text analysis. Applied to a novel and unique data set of over 11,000 police breaking news published between 2015 and 2019, the GHCD proves to be a fast, reliable and valid instrument for detecting descriptions of hate crimes in textual data. The GHCD thus provides policy makers and researchers with an effective tool to assist in the development and evaluation of geographically targeted interventions and the investigation of causes and effects of prejudice motivated crimes.     
<p>&nbsp;</p>  

**Changing the Rules of the Game: Populists in power and constitutional retrogression**  
*Draft available upon request*  
> **Abstract:** As populists rise from periphery to power, the question of whether and how these actors threaten democratic institutions becomes ever more pressing. While previous research has focused primarily on the determinants of populist electoral success and its consequences for voters, established parties, and overall democratic quality, this article examines the impact of populist parties' government participation on the most fundamental of democratic institutions, the constitution. Drawing on a comprehensive dataset, covering information on constitutional changes and populist parties across 30 European democracies (1989-2019), I investigate how the entrance of these actors into power impacts the content of constitutional redrafting. Using a series of matching and difference-in-differences models, I find no support for the notion that populists in power are going after constitutionally enshrined horizontal accountability. Neither de jure executive power nor de jure judicial independence significantly shift after populists enter the government. The same results hold when accounting for the level of constitutional rigidity. The findings make an important contribution to the literature on populist parties, constitutional change and democratic backsliding.   
<p>&nbsp;</p>  
<p>&nbsp;</p>  


## **Selected Work in Progress**

**The electoral effects of elite-led anti-LGBTQ+ mobilization**  
-- with [Tarik Abou-Chadi](https://www.tarikabouchadi.net/), [Lukas Stoetzer](http://lukas-stoetzer.org/), and [Heike Klüver](http://www.heike-kluever.com/) -- 
> **Abstract:** Does elite-led anti-LGBTQ+ mobilization bolster the political fortunes of the radical-right? While a growing body of literature documents the increasing politicization of LGBTQ+ and gender related issues by conservative elites, few studies have analyzed the electoral effects of these strategies. In particular, whether legal acts of social exclusion activate and mobilize supporters of radical-right parties, remains largely unknown. To answer this question, we study the introduction of anti-LGBTQ+ resolutions in many Polish municipalities prior to the 2020 Polish presidential election. Our empirical strategy relies on a series of difference-in-differences and synthetic control models, and finds no clear evidence that anti-LGBTQ+ resolutions increased the support for the radical-right Law and Justice party. To the contrary, the evidence suggest that anti-LGBTQ+ resolutions mobilized support for the opposed Civic platform. Overall, this study's findings are relevant for understanding the electoral consequences of elite-led mobilization against stigmatized or discriminated groups, as well as the politics of social exclusion more broadly.  
<p>&nbsp;</p>  

<!--- **Same in all but name? The effects of same-sex partnership recognition rights on public attitudes: Experimental Evidence**    
> **Abstract:** Do parallel institutions promote backlash against marginalized groups? While observational studies regularly find marriage equality to increase support for gays and lesbians, same-sex registered partnership tends to either be unrelated or even promote prejudiced attitudes and behavior. In this preregistered survey experiment, I study the individual level mechanism underlying this phenomenon. I argue that integrating minorities into existing benefits will positively affect attitudes toward these groups and increase support for the proposed policy by decreasing perceptions of (a) inter-group differences, (b) realistic, but not symbolic, threat, and (c) a minority-oriented policy motivation. Yet, I predict this effect to be weaker for the introduction of exclusive new benefits. To test my expectations, I run an experimental vignette study in Turkey (N=1500) and randomly assign respondents to one of two hypothetical scenarios (i.e., extension to marriage equality versus introduction of same-sex registered partnership rights) or a control condition. The results have important implications for the broader literature on minority rights and policy feedback, as well as for policy makers that seek ways to prevent backlash.
<p>&nbsp;</p>)
-->

**Does Strategic Portfolio Allocation Pay Off? The electoral effects of issue yield orientated portfolio allocation**  
> **Abstract:** Are coalition parties who strategically allocate their portfolios according to electoral opportunities rewarded at the polls? While scholars have extensively discussed the quantitative and qualitative dimensions of portfolio allocation, relatively little is known about the electoral consequences of holding specific ministerial posts. The present study seeks to close this gap by investigating the electoral effects of issue yield orientated portfolio allocation. More specifically, I argue that coalition parties benefit electorally from controlling portfolios that cover policy areas characterized by a high ability to mobilize core voters while simultaneously broadening the base of support. I test my argument using an original dataset covering a total of 122 parties in 17 European countries between 1991 and 2017. The results of a multilevel linear regression analysis suggest that the extent to which a coalition party manages to optimally allocate its ministries according to issue yield theory positively affects their vote share at the next election. The present paper contributes to a systematic and comparatively informed discussion on both cabinet formation in coalition governments in general and portfolio allocation as a vote-maximizing strategy of political actors in particular.
